The Boeing 737 Max aircraft remains grounded, but that doesn't mean airlines are waiting for its return to sell tickets on future flights.
Travelers shopping for fall and holiday season flights will find hundreds of U.S. flights scheduled on a Max 8 or Max 9 on Southwest, American, United and Alaska.
Airline data giant OAG pulled schedule information for USA TODAY and found 393 flights scheduled on a Max on Monday, Sept. 9, for example. That's a week after Labor Day, the date through which Southwest and American, the two largest U.S. operators of the plane, have canceled Max flying. On a mid-December Monday, the total is 327, according to OAG, though some airlines don't assign plane types that far in advance so the total will grow.
Southwest accounts for more than half of the upcoming Max flying, followed in order by American, United and Alaska, which will add the plane to its fleet as previously planned with a couple daily flights between Seattle and southern California.
The schedules are subject to change, of course, especially if the grounding lingers. Airlines already have extended Max flight cancellations twice as Boeing has worked on a software fix and the Federal Aviation Administration and regulators around the world scrutinize the plane involved in two fatal crashes in less than five months that killed 346 people, and they'll soon have to decide whether to do it again.
The Max represents just a fraction of U.S. airlines' fleets. Southwest has 34 Max aircraft in its fleet of more than 750 Boeing 737s. American has 24 in its fleet of 950 mainline aircraft. Southwest will operate the Max on just a single daily flight on a route in most cases.
Still, airlines are prepping for the plane's return, so travelers who care about what kind of plane they are on should be, too.
The Max became a household word after the second fatal crash, of Ethiopian Air Flight 302 on March 10, which led to the Max grounding by the FAA on March 13.
Travelers bombarded airlines with questions about whether they were due to fly on the plane and how to avoid it. Southwest added a "How do I look up my aircraft type'' feature online. The social media storm has subsided since the grounding but will likely pick up again as the plane's return nears.
Airline executives admit some passengers are going to avoid the plane, at least initially, and surveys show varying degrees of flyer reluctance to board one. More than 2 in 5 passengers said they would take flights that are less convenient or more expensive to avoid the Max, according to a survey by Atmosphere Research Group.
"I’ll be the first to say that in studies like this what people say and what they end up doing can be dramatically different,'' said Henry Harteveldt, president of Atmosphere Research and a veteran travel analyst. "But even if the actual numbers are one tenth of what the research shows, airlines that operate the 737 Max are going to face a very tough time … convincing people to fly the plane.''